
Sarartha  Darsini

Tenth Canto Commentaries 
Srimad Bhagavatam

Srila Visvanatha Cakravarti Thakura

Translator: Bhanu Swami 

Chapter One

The Advent of Lord Krsna

Text 1

King Pariksit said: My dear lord, you have elaborately described the dynasties of both the moon-god and the sun-god, with the exalted and wonderful character of the kings.

Visvanatha Cakravarti Thakura: In this verse Pariksit Maharaja praises Sukadeva Gosvami for his previous Bhagavatam descriptions. He did this thank Sukadeva Gosvami and to encourage him to continue speaking hari-katha. Being naturally a devotee of Lord Krishna, Pariksit Maharaja especially wanted to hear more about the wondreful glories of Sri Krishna.
Though the word surya, the sun-god, soma is mentioned first. This is because the moon-god Candra (soma) is the grandson of Brahma: amsa of Brahma; the deity of the  mind, and most inportantly Sri Krishna appeared in his dynasty, soma-vamsa. Though the wonderful activities of Svayambhuva and his dynasty were realed in the Fourth Canto, they did not culminate in sweetness. However, sweetnness was finally attained in  the moon dynasty (soma-vamsa) and Lord Rama of the sun dynasty (syrya-vamsa). Thus, the discussions of these dynasties became very prominent in Srimad Bhagavatam.


Text 2
O best of munis, you have also described the descendants of Yadu, who were very pious and strictly adherent to religious principles. Now, if you will, kindly describe the wonderful, glorious activities of Lord Visnu, of Krsna, who appeared in the Yadu dynasty with Baladeva, His plenary expansion.

Visvanatha Cakravarti Thakura: yados: "You have also previously described the pious nature of Yadu. Though Yadu disobeyed his father's order, because of his pure devotion, his exalted character is raised in the Ninth and Eleventh Canto of Srimad Bhagavatam." muni-sattama: Pariksit address Sukadeva as the king of the munis - muni sattama, because as a sage (muni) Sukadeva Gosvami is completely knowledgeable, and as a devotee (sat) he is the chief since he established the supreme position of bhakti. visnor viryani: "Please describe the heroic exploits (ciyani) of He who has appeared (avatirnasya) as the person whose amsa is Visnu in Vaikuntha." Another meaning: "Please describe the exploits partially (amsena), since it is impossible to completely describe Krishna's pastimes"


Text3
avatirya yador vmamse, bhagavan bhuta-bhavanah, krtavan yani visvamtma, tani nyo vada vistarat

The Supersoul, the Supreme Personality of Godhead Sri Krishna, the cause of the cosmic manifestation, appeared in the dynasty of Yadu. Please tell me elaboratly about His glorious activities and character, from the beginning to the end of His life.

Visvanatha Cakravarti Thakura: Pariksit Maharaja said, "Sukadeva, previously you briefly told how Krishna was taken from Kamsa's prison to Vraja. But you did not explain everything in the description. O muni, you desribed it in two verses. Now I pry that you will desribe this incident many verses."
bhagavan-bhagavan: Bhagavan Sri Krishna descends to immerse the jivas (bhuta) in prema (bahvana) and to fill all living entities with bhava. Many verses support this point such as Srimad Bhagavatam (9.24.64): vakyair vilrama-liaya, nrlikam ramayam asa, mutya sarvanga-ramyaya, "By His pleasing smiles, affectionate behavior, instructions and His uncommon heroic pastimes like lifting Govardhana Hill, Sri Krsna appearing in His transcendental body, pleased all of humaa society. (avitrpta-drsam nrnam) by revealing His beautiful all-attactive form. Even after tasting Krsna's sweetness, however the people remained unsatisfied. Everyone developed a desire to constantly taste the sweetness of Krsna. Srimad Bhagavatam (11.1.6) says: sva-murty loke-lavanya-nurmuktya locanam nrnam, "The sweetness of Krsnas's beauty steals the functions of all senses. The eyes no longer desireto see any other form. Drowning them in the ocean of His beauty, Syamasundara gives them prema". 
visvatam: Krsna is called visvatam, the Supersoul of the entire univrse or Paramatma, because He is the true object of love rather than the body of other jivas. This is explained in Brahma's prayers in fourteenth chaper of the Tenth Canto. vada vistarat:"Please explain extenxively (vistarat) or elaboratly since my intelligence is slow to grasp the subject."

Text 4
nivrtta-tarsair upagiyamanad, bhavausadhac chrotra-mano-'bhiramat, ka uttamasloka-gunanubadat, puman viajyeta vina pasughnat

Glorification of the Supreme Personality of Godhead is performed in the parampara system; that is, it is conveyed from spiritual master to disciple. Such glorification is relished by those no longer interested in the false, temporary glorification of this cosmic manifestation. Descriptions of the Lord are the right medicine for the conditioned soul undergoing repeated birth and death. Therefore, who will cease hearing such glorification of the Lord except a butcher or one who is killing his own self?

Visvanatha Cakravarti Thakura: I am taking whatever remnants Sridhara Swami and Sanatana Gosvami have left. 
King Pariksit said so Sukadeva Gosvami, "I am a tiny jiva bound up by the deseas of material life. How can I stop drinking the great medicine of Krsna's pastimes recited by you, who are the best of doctors endowed with the greatest fortune?" With this intention Pariksit Maharaja speaks this verse.
tarsair: thirst, trsna, or attachment to martereila enjoyment.
nivrtta-tarsair: By taking the medicine of hearing Krsna's pastimes one extinguishes (nivrtta) the thirst (trsna) for material life.
Nivrtta-tarsair indicates pure devotees, notjnanis, because of the use of present tense and the prefix 'upa' in upagiyamanad. Jnanis meditate but they do not chant Krsna's glories. Liberated pure devotees continually glorify the practice of hearing krsna-katha over jnana oand other processes. 
upagiyamanad:  Upa incicates intense or continuous glorification. In other words, "We loudly praise this medicine, as it has cured us of our disease. What more can be said about tasting it? You (Sukadeva) are the taster."
bhavausadhac: Who could stop drinking the sweet topics of Krsna which are like a vedicine (ausadhi) to cure the disease of material existence (bhava)? In other words, those who get the opportunity to hear the pastimes of Krsna will not stop listening because it cures them of the disease of material existence. 
chrotra: srotra, listener. Because such topics are please the mind (manobhiramat) neither the speaker of krsna-katha nor listener tires of hearing about Krsna. 
mano-bhiramat: Unlike other medicines, this medicine does not have a bitter taste. Therefor Pariksit Maharaja says mano-'bhiramat: krsna-katha gives great plasure to the ear and mind. Therefor drinking the nectar of the Bhagavatam with both your ears and mind.
pasughnat: Only people involved in killing animals (pasughnat) in sacrifice with a longing to attain celestial enjoyment on Svargaloka will not listen to these topics. Srimad Bhagavatam (3.3.18) also confirs, ayajayad dharma-sutam, that those seeking dharma, artha and karma (religion, wealth and enjoyment) have no tast for the name, qualities and resplendent pastimes of the all-attracive Madhusudana Krsna.
Another meaning: "Who would give up drinking the topics of Krsna that are recited by Sri Guru? Even liberated sould loucly glorify the Supreme Lord Krsna. Only those desiring wealth and matereial enjoyment would stop hearing about Krsna. Thus Pariksit Maharaja says that only a killer of animals (pasughnat) would stop hearing krsna-katha and no one else.

Text 5-7
Taking the boat of Krsna's lotus feet, my grandfather Arjuna and others crossed the ocean of the Battlefield of Kuruksetra, in which such commanders as Bismadeva resembled great fish that could very easily have swallowed them. By the mercy of Lord Krsna, my grandfathers crossed this ocean, which was very difficult to cross, as easily as one steps over the hoofprint of a calf. Because my mother surrendered unto Lord Krsna's lotusfeet, the Lord, Sudarshana-cakra in hand, entered her womb and saved my body, the body of the last remaining descendant of the Kurus and the Pandavas, which was almost destroyed by fiery weapoon of Asvatthama. Lord Sri Krsna appearing with and outside of all materially embodied living beings by His own potency in the forms of eternal time - that is Paramatma and as virat-rupa - gave liberation to everyone, either as cruel death or as life. Kindly enlighten me by scribing His transcendental charaterisics.

Visvanatha Cakravarti Thakura: Verse 5: 
"I should also hear the topics of Krsna because He is the protector of our dynasty."Thus Pariksit Maharaja speaks this verse.
"My grandfather crossed the ocean of the Kaurave army, though it was difficlut to surrmoutn because of Bhishman and others (devavratady), who were like timinagala fish, (timinagala) that could easily swallow or defeat the demigods (amoaranjayair). Krsna mande that ocean as insignificant as the wather in a calf's hoof-print. "The cause was taking shelter of the boat (yat-plavah) of Krsna's lotus feet. Please speak about that person. Surrender to Krsna's lotus feet enables one to cross the ocean of material existence."
Verse 6: 
"I must certainly hear about Krsna because He is my only protector." With this in mind Pariksit Maharaja speaks this verse.
atto-cakro: The holder of the cakra, Krsna, anong with His club, (mentioned in the First Canto), entered into my mother, Uttara, who had surrendered to Him. The Lordeasily saved my body from being burned (viplustam) by the heat of Asvatthama's weapon (drauny astra).
ca: indicated the Krsna also protected the limbs of Pariksit Maharaja's mother.
Verse 7: 
Krsna's topics should be heard because He alone bestows the final goal on all those with material bodies (akhila deha bhajam). Whit this intention the present verse is spoken.
bahin: outside. Krsna awards death to those envious (bahih) of his devotees. antar: Krsna gives eternal life to those who are His near and dear devotees (antar). purusa: To devotees like Vasudeva, Krsna bestows bliss in His tow handed or four handed human form.
kala-rupaih: To demons like Kamsa, Krsna appears in the form of time or death. According to the statements of Bhagavatam, Krsna's appearance resembles the prescription of rock candy to a person afflicted with jaundice. Though Krsna first appears as time to award death to demons, He later awards them liberation.
prayacchatah: (the giver) is used in present tense to indicate that it is being seen before Pariksit's eyes, or to convey the eternal nature Krsna's pastimes. 
maya manusyasya: The body of the Supreme Lord is made of eternal spiritual energy called maya, whereas the body of a human is made of material energy.
The Madhya Bhasya of the Pramanita Sruti says, ato mayamayam vismum pravadanti manisinah: "The sages say the body accepted by Lord Visnu, the Supreme Personality of Godhead, is called mayamaya. Visnu's body is not formed of the external energy. Therefore, this maya refers to Krsna's internal spiritual potency, yogamaya.

Text 8 
rohinyas tanayah prokto, ramah, sankarsanas tyaya, devakya garbha-sambandhah, kuto dehantaram vina
My dear Sukadeva Gosvami, you have already explained that Sankarsana, who belongs to the second quadruple, appeared as the son of Rohini Lord Balarama. If Balarama was not transferred from one body to another, how it it possible that He was first in the womb of Devaki and then in the womb of Rohini? Kindly explain this to me.
Visvanatha Cakravarti Thakura: In the next four verses (8-11) Pariksit Maharaja inquires about the details of Krsna's birth. A general desciption was given in Srimad Bhagavatam (9.24.54-55) which describes the birth of Devali's seventh child with the words sankarsanam (Sankarsana) and ahi-isvaram (the supreme controller). Here Pariksit Maharaja says, "Sukadeva Gosvami, elsewhere you have said Sankarsana is the son of Rohini, so how could He come from Devaki's womb without having to change bodies?"

Text 9
Why did Krsna, the Surpreme Personality of Godhead, leave the house of His father, Vasudeva, and transfer Himself to the House of Nanda in Vrindavana?
Visvanatha Cakravarti Thakura: varja: Krsna went from Vasudeva's home (the prison call) in Mathura to Vraja. Here Vrana means Mahavana. After going to vraja, Krsna left the home of Nanda. Pariksit Mharajan is asking, "Where did Krsna go in Vrndavana to establish His home along with the cowherd men?"

Text 10
Lord Krsna lived in Vrindavana and in Mathura. What did He do there? Why did He kill Kamsa, His mother's brother? Such killing is not at all sanctioned in the sastras.

Visvanatha Cakravarti Thakura: Madhupuryam: refers to Mathura and Dvaraka, the cities of the descendents of Madhu. "Why did Krsna kill His mother's (Devaki) brother Kamsa? Krsna should not have done that, since Kamsa was his mother's brother."

Text 11
Krsna, the Supreme Personality of Godhead, has no matereial body, yet He appears as a human being. For how many years did He live with the descendants of  Vrsni? How many wives did He marry, and for how many years did He live in Dvaraka?

Visvanatha Cakravarti Thakura: How many years did Krsna live with the Yadus?
deham manusam asritya: By using this phrase, Pariksit Maharaja indicates that the years should be in human calculation, not that of the devas.
In other places the Lord is referred to as "paramatma narakrti" or "bhudha prarbrahma manusya cihanadhari." The Gopala-tapani Upanisad says, narakrti para_brahma karana-manusah: " The Supreme Absolute Truth, for His own purpose, appears in a humanlike form, although He is the sourse of everything." Tese sastric satements show that the human-like form of Krsna is His svarupa or spiritual form. Thus the phrase deham manusam cannot mean that Krsna has a material body.

Text 12
O great sage, who know everything about Krsna, please describe in detail all the activities of which I have inquired and also those of which I have not, for I have full faith and am very eager to hear of them.

Text 13
Because of my vow on the verge of death, I have given up even drinking water, yet because I am drinking the nectar of topics about Krsna, which is flowing from the lotus mouth of Your Lordship, my hunger and thirst, which are extremely difficult to bear, cannot hinder me.

Visvanatha Cakravarti Thakura: "Pariksit, because you are afflicted by hunger and thirst you should rest a while." In respoinse to Sukadeva's advice, Pariksit speaks this verse: "It was due to hunger and thirst that I lost my discrimination, and placed the snake arouind the neck of the muni. Now that I am drinking hari-kathamritam, the nectar of the pastimes of Hari, I have completely given yp food and water.
Hunger and thirst no longer afflict me."
Why is the present tense used here? Because hunber will manifest the moment one stops hearing about Krsna. ambhoja: lotus; This word suggest the sweetness and intoxicating effect of the topics of Hari. For this reason, Pariksit Maharaja has forgotten his intolerable hunger and thirst. The lotus suggests that the mouth of Sukadeva is fragrant like a lotus. amrtam: nectar; Indicates that the lotus mouth (mukhamboja) of Sukadeva Gosvami is like the moon in that it drips nectar; bestows joy; and destroys the darkness in the hearts of the listeners. Ot also means that Pariksit, being thirsty for the pastimes of Hari (hari-kathamrtam), is like a cakora bird longing for the moonlight. All of this expresses Pariksit Maharaja's great attachment for hearing the topics of Lord Sri Krsna.

Text 14
Suta Gosvami said: O son of Bhrgu (Saunaka Rsi), after Sukadeva Gosvami, the most respectable devotee, the son of Vyasadeva, heard the pious questions of Maharaja Pariksit, he thankd the King with great respect. Then he began to discourse on topics concerning Krsna, which are the remedy all sufferings in this age of Kali.

Visvanatha Cakravarti Thakura: bhrgu-nandana: Suta Gosvami speaks, "O son of Bhrgu (Saunaka Rsi)."
kali kalmasa ghnam: Sukadeva began describing the pastimes of Krsna which dispel the sorrows of the jivas of Kali-yuga and destroy the worst of sins. visnu ratam: always protected by Visnu; Sukadeva began describing Krsna's pastimes to Pariksit (visnu ratam).
bhagavata pradhanah: chief devotee; describes Sukadeva as the chief among devotees, who shows great regard for the book bhagavata and the devotee bhagavata.

Text 15
Srila Sukadeva Gosvami said: O Your Mahesty, best of all saintly kings, because you certain the your intelligence is firmly fixed in spiritual understandink which is the only true goal for humanity. Because that attraction is unceasing, it is certainly sublime.

Visvanatha Cakravarti Thakura: Samyag vyavasita buddhis: Sukadeva Gosvami said, "You have developed firm attachment to the Lord because (yat) your intelligence (bhuddi) is fixed (samyag vyavasita). rajarsi sattama: You previously addressed me as muni sattama, the best among the munis and devotees. This is my response. O king, you are the best among saintly kings (rajarsi statta) and devotees because of your superior devotiion to the Lord. By Krsna's mersy you defeated the power of brahma teja (Asvattama's astra) at the time of birth and death."

Text 16
The Ganages, emanating from the tow of Lord Visnu, purifies the three worlds, the upper, middle and lower planetary systems. Similarly, when one asks questions about the pastimes and characteristics of Lord Vasudeva, Krsna, three varieties of men are purified: the speaker of preacher, he who inquires, and the people in general who listen.
Visvanatha Cakravarti Thakura: pada salilam yatha: Hari-katha purifies three types of persons, just like the caranamrta of salagrama or a deity, which purifies three types of persons: whose who put it on their head, those who drink it and those who do both. It also means that the topics of Hari are just like the Ganga, which purifies those in the upper, middle and lower worlds. The topics of Hari purify the speaker, the inquirer and then the listener.

Text 17 
Once when mother earth was overburdened by hundreds of thousands of military phalanxed of various conceited demons dressed like kings, she approached Lord Brahama for relief.
Visvanatha Cakravarti Thakura: :Now hear the famous reason for Krsna's appearance."
Sukadeva Gosvami speaks with this intention.
daityanika: Due to being afflicted by the burden of the sins of countless soldiers of the daityas, demons, who though not born of Diti's lineage, attained their demonic status by their actions, the earth personified approached Brahma situated on the peak of Mount Meru.
brahmanam saranam yayau: This was not the Brahma who usually stays on Satyaloka. In the Satya-yuga before the appearance of Krsna, King Raivata went to Brahma on Satyaloka along with his daughter Revati to ask about his daughter's marriage. In Brahma's assembly the Gandharvas Haha and Huhu were singing. During the length of their one song on Satyaloka (Brahmaloka), Satya and Treta yugas on earth finished, and Dvapara-yuga also passed. Krsna about Balarama were about to appear.
Brahma said, "Please give your daughter in marriage to Balarama, who has now appeared on the earth planet. He is a suitable groom." Thus, situated on Satyaloka, Hiranyagarbha Brahma was listening to the song while Satya, Treta and Dvapara yugas passed by on the earht planet until Krsna and Balarama's appearance. 
bhumih: The deity of the earth could not have approached the Brahma on Satyaloka to make her request. Bhumi, earth personified, went instead to Vairaja Braham living on Mount Meru. The great sage Parasara Muni confirms this: jagama dharimi meroh amaje tridivaukasam, "The goddess of the earth went along with the demigods to Mount Meru."

Text 19
Thereafter, having heard of the distress of mother earth, Lord Brahma, with mother earth, Lord Siva and all the other demigods, approached the shore of the ocean of milk.
Visvanatha Cakravarti Thakura: tad-upadharya: After hearing from the earth personified and understanding everything rightly, Brahama went to the milk ocean.
atha: The word atha is excessive usage if it means "then of thereafter." It can be explained as follows: Brahama though: "My work is creation and Visnu's work id maintenance. For this work of maintenance it is better that we go to Visnu, resting on the milk ocean. We should go and request His help." After considering in this way, Brahma left for the milk ocean.
sa-tri-nayanas: Lord Siva, who has three eyes. There were two tasks here: protection of the earth and destruction of the demons. Thinking that he could engage Indra in protection the earth and Sive in destroying the demons, Brahama went to the milk ocean with Siva and the demigods.

Text 20
After reaching the shore of the ocean of milk, the demigods worshiped the Supreme Personality of Godhead, Lord Visnu, the master of the whole universe, the supreme God of all gods, who provides for everyone and diminishes everyone's suffering. With great attention, they worshiped Lord Visnu, who lies on the ocean of milk, by reciting the Vedic mantras known as the Purusa-suka.
Visvanatha Cakravarti Thakura: Why should Brahma go to Visnu? This vers answers the question.
Jagannatham, Deva-devam, Vrsakapim: Visnu in Jagannatha, Lord of the universe; Devadeva, the worshipable deity of all the demigods; and also Vrsakapi, He who fulfills all desires and removes all suffering. By visiting Visnu, Brahama and the demigods provlaim their subordination to Visnu's authority in protecting the earth.

Text 21
While in trance, Lord Bramhma heard the words of Lord Visnu vibrating in the sky. Thus he told the demigods: O demigods, hear form me the order of Ksirodakasayi Visnu, the Suprme Person, and excute it attentively without delay.
Visvanatha Cakravarti Thakura: gagane: sky; Brahma did not directly see or meet Visnu. In a trance of meditation (samadhau) Brahma heard a voice in th sky. From this one van understand that to see Visnu directly is difficult even for Brahma. Thus when Krsna, the origin of Visnu, shows Himself directly to all men when He appears on earth, it id a display of extraordinary mercy, ot available at any other time.
gam paurusim: means the words of Ksirodakasayi Visnu, the supreme purusa (person),

Text 22
Lord Brahma informed the demigods: Before we submitted our petition to the Lord, He was already awar of the distress on earth. Consequently, for as long as the Lord moves on earth to diminish ots durden by His own potency in the form of time, all of you demigods should appear through penary portions as sons and greansons on the family of the Yadus.
Visvanatha Cakravarti Thakura: Brahma repeats the words of Lord Visnu in four verses (22-25).
pumsa: means Bhagavatam Sri Krsna, because Srimad Bhagavatam describes Krsna as the person who will appear to relieve the problems of the earth: krsnah svayam samabhavat paramaah puman yo (Brahma-samhima 5.39), Krsna Himself who is the supreme being, puman, appeared. 
avadhritah: known; Krsna already knew te sufferings of the earth. amsair yadu: The demigods should appear along with the Lord's associates of the Lord's (amsaih) in the fmily of Yadu, the Kurus of more speifically the Pandavas. isvarasvarah: Krsna is th Lord of all of lords (isvaras) including Visnu.

Text 23
The Suprme Personality of Godhead, Sri Krsna, who has full potency, will personally appear as the son of Vasudeva. Therefore all the wives of the demigods should also appear in order to satify Him.
Visvanatha Cakravarti Thakura: surastiyah: wives of the demigods; refers to expansions of Krsna's etereal female companions, who were present in the heavenly planets. Examples are the wives of the Manvantara Avataras and Lord Vamana. They perfomed worship to attain friendship and intimacy with Krsna's most dear lovers (Vraja-gopis). Because of this worship they took birth (sambhavanty) in the Yadu dynasty as different priya sakhis of Krsna in Bhauma Vrndavana to enrich to Lord's transcenental pastimes.
janisyate tat-priyaratham: Ujjvala-nilamani says, nitya priyanam amsas tu. When Krsna appears in the family of the demigods in partial form, His beloveds also appear in the forms of demigoddesses to please Him. When Krsna appeared on earth, these devis appeared as young unmarried gopis, priya sakhis of the nitya-priya sakhis.

Text 24
The foremost manifestation of Krsna id Sankarsana, who is know as Ananta. He is the origin of all incarnations within this material world. Previous to the appearance of Lord Krsna, just to please the Suprme Lord Krsna in His transcendental pastimes.
Visvanatha Cakravarti Thakura: vasudeva-kalanantah: Ananta is an amsa or kala (portion) of Baladeva. This id supported with verses like: evamsena sahasra vadano'nantah (whose portion is the thousand mouthed Ananta), and vasyaikamsena vidhrta jagate jagatah pate, "O mighty armed Balarama, with a single portion of Yourself You hold up the universe." (Srimad Bhagavatam 10.65.28) Here Baladeva is described as Ananta who is a portion of Vasudeva.
svarat: usually means independent; he who exists (raj or rat) by himself  (sva), but here it menas He who exist with His own brother Krsna (sva). 
deva: Baladeva, who is existing with his own brother (svarat) will appear first (agratah bhavita).

Text 25
The potency of the Lord, known as visnu as visnumaya, who is as good as the Supreme Personality of Godhead, will also appear with Lord Krsna. This potency, acting in different capacities, captivates all the worlds, both material and spiritual. At the request of her master, she wll appear with her different potencies in order to execute the work of the Lord.

Text 26
sri suka uvaca ity adisyamara ganan prajapati patir vibhu asvasya ca mahim girbhih sva dhama paramam yayau

Sukadeva Gosvami continued: After thus advising the demigods and pacifying mother earth, the very powerful Lord Brahma, who is th master of all other Prajapatis and id therefor known as Prajapati-pati, returned to his own abode, Bramaloka.

Visvanatha Cakravarti Thakura: Iti: thus; indicates that here the message of Visnu as related by Brahma to the demigods ends.

Text 27 
suraseno yadupaitir, mathuram avasan purim mathuran churasenams ca visayan bubhuje pura
Formerly, Surasena, the chief of the Yadu dynasty, had gone to live in the city of Mathura. There he enjoyed the places known as Mathura and Surasena.

Visvanatha Cakravarti Thakura: mathuram: NOw begins the descriptoin of Krsna's appearance in Vasudeva's house in Mathura. First the suitable place of His birth is described.

Text 28
rajadhani tatah sbhut sarva yadava bhubhujam mathura bhagavan yatra nityam sannihito harih

Since that time, the sity of Mathura had been the capital of all the kings of the Yadu dynasty. The city and district of Mathura are very intimately connected with Krsna, for Lord Krsna lives there eternally.
Visvanatha Cakravarti Thakura: nityam sannihito: All perfect Krsna is eternally present in His spriritual form in Mathura in the material world. It is there that Krsna appears and becomes visible to the people of the world. Krsna does not descend from Vaikuntha. But when Krsna appears, HIs expansions from Vaikunta and Svetadvipa unite with Him. After the passtimes are over, they return to their respective abodes. That hte descend from Vaikuntha and later return there is in the Srimad Bhagavatam (3.2.15): paravareso mahad amsayukto.

Text 29
tasyam tu karhicic chaurir vasudevah drtodvahah devaky suryaya sardham prayane ratham aruhat

Some time ago, Vasudeva, who belonged to the demigod family [or to the Sura dynasty],
married Devaki. After the marriage, he mounted his chariot to return home with his newly married wife.
Visvanatha Cakravarti Thakura: Vasudeva mounted the chariot with his newly married wife (suryaya) Devaki to go to his house (prayane) the day after the marriage.

Text 30 
ugrasena sutah kamsah svasuh priya cikirsaya rasmin hayanam jagraha raukmai ratha satair vrtah

Kamsa, the son of King Ugrasena, in order to please his sister Devaki on the occasion of her marriage, took charge of the reins of the horses and became the chariot river. He was surrounded by hundreds of golden chariots.
Visvanatha Cakravarti Thakura: svasuh: In some deitions, the word svasuh is replaced by bhagnay. Kamsa took the rains (rasmin) of the horses in order to please his siter (svasu or bhagnaya).

Text 31-32
catuh satam paribarham gajanam hema makinam asvanam ayutam sardham rathanam ca tri sat satam dasinam sukumarinam dve sate samalankrte duhutr devaka pradad yane duhir vatsalah

Devaki's father, King Devaka, was very much affectionate to his daughter. Therefore, while seh and her husband were leav ing home, he gave her adowry of four hundred elephants nicely decorated with golden garlands. He also gave tin thousand horses, eighteen hundred charits, and two hundred very beautiful young maindservants, fully decorated with ornaments.
Visvanatha Cakravarti Thakura: dowry. Yane: at the time of the journey.

Text 33
sankha turya mrdangas ca nedur dundubhaya samam prayana prakrame tata vara vadhvo sumangalam

O beloved son, Maharaja Pariksit, when the bride and bridegroom were ready to start, conchells, bugles, drums and kettledrums all vibrated in concrt for their austpicious departure.

Text 34
pathi pragrahinam kamsam abhasyahasarira vak asyas tvam astamo garbho hanta yam vahase budha

While Kamsa, controlling the reins of the horeses, was driving the chariot along theway, an unembodied voice addredded him, "You foolish rascal, the eighth cild of the woman you are carring will kill you!"
Visvanatha Cakravarti Thakura: asarira vak: While Kamsa held the reins of the horeses in this hand, an unseen voice announced, "The eihth offsping of the woman you re carrying will kill you." Out of fear the Krsna might not kill Kamsa because of his extreme affection for evaki, the demigods delivered this message frim teh sky in order to arouse Kamsa's anger towards Devaki.
Thus hearing tie voice from the sky, evalo became blissful, for she understood that the Lord would appear in her womb, Also through the message it was understood that the six sons of Marici would be delivered from their curse ofter being killed by Kamsa. garbho: prgnancy; id used instead of putra (son), so that when Kamsa say eighth child to be a daughter he would not be suspicious.

Text 35
ity uktah sa khalah papo bhojanam kulapamsanah bhaginim hantum arabdham khadga pani kace 'grahit

Kamsa was a condemned personality in the Bhoja dynasty because he was envious and sinful. Therefore, upon hearin g this onen from the sky, he caught hold of his sister's hair with his left hand and took up his sword with his right hand to serve her head from head her body.

Visvanatha Cakravarti Thakura: kulapamsana: Kamsa, who contaminated his family with sin, prepared to kill Devaki. Out of affection for his sister, Kamsa held the reins of the horse with his left hand. Suddenly he grabbed Devaki's hair in order to kill her. Throwing away the whip fro mhis right hand, he took up his sword.
The affection of materialistic people is flickering and easily transforms into hate. They have no regard for religous principles. They are so shameless that even in the eyes of the common man they can commit murder.

Text 36 
Tam jugupsita karmanam nrsamsam nirapatrapam vasudevo maha bhaga uvaca parisantvayan
Waiting to pacify Kamsa, who was so cruel and envious that he was shamelessly redy to kill his sister, the great soul Vasudeva, who was to be the father of Krsna, spake to him in the following words.

Visvanatha Cakravarti Thakura: mahabhaga: greatly fortunate; Upon seeing the Kamsa was ready to kill his wife, Vasudeva did not show anger because he was an ocean of good qualities such as patience, gravityy, frogivness and cleverness. The question may arise, "How could a cruel person such as Kamsa listen to Vasudeva's advice?" Therefore he is described as mahabhaga. Even tigers and snakes do not create obstaclds whn they encounter those possessed of good qualities.

Text 37
sri-vasudeva uvaxa slafhaniya guna surair bhavan boja-yasaskarah sa katham bhaginim hanyat striyam udvaha-parvani

Vasudeva said: My dear brother in law Kamsa, you are the pride of your family, the Boja dynasty, and great heroes prais your qualities. How could such a qualified person as you kill a woman, your own sister, especially on theu occasion of her marriage?

Visvanatha Cakravarti Thakura: Vasudeva used the diplomatic principles of sama, pacification of qualities; dana, personal gain and helping others; and bheda, creating dissension.
slaghaniya gunah: one with praiseworthy qualities: glorifies Kamsa's qualities (sama). boja yasah-karah: a brilliant star in the Bhoja dynasty; invokes family relationship (sama). bhaginim: sister; by mentioning this word to invoke fear and doubt, Vasudeva employs dissension of bheda. hayat stiyam: "How can you kill?" indicates gain and helping others (dana). Though Devaki bears your killer, you will gain fame by not killing her since she is a woman. Sparing her life, therefore, is helping others.
udvaha-pravani: "Afterall, Devaki is a defensless woman, your sister, and it will happen during her wedding. Presently you are a famous person, but killing her now will bring infamy in this life and hell in the next life."
Thus Vasudeva indicates two types of bheda, problems in life and next. The real intent of Vasudeva's words can be undersood by taking opposite meanings. Saying Kmasa has praiseworthy qualities, actually indicates that Kamsa does not have those qualities. In the Boja dynasty Kmasa is famous for causing problems. By killing his sister Kamsa will destry his dynasty. 

Text 38
